Migraines and Graduate School: A Survival Guide

So you have migraines, and you're in graduate school. Me too. Well, at least I was. I graduated.  Anyway, first of all--I'm sorry. It's going to suck. There's no other way around it. You should quickly accept that there will be days or weeks (god forbid) when your head is utterly fucked. Totally trashed. Mucho, *mucho* no bueno. But because you are smart and perserving enough to get into graduate school, you will probably want to work through the pain. Listen: don't. Don't even try. Working through the migraines will probably seem heroic (vis a vi tragedy) to you, somehow. It's not. No one cares. Recognize that from the outside you are probably just doing crappy work, and this will lead to more stress--and migraines--later on.

This document is a quick writeup on how I made it through my PhD with migraines. Best case scenario, you find something useful in here that improves your quality of life. Worst case you gain some empathy for someone you know who is struggling with this ancient, unrelenting mind-flayer. 

Advice #1: Tell Your Advisors

Tell them now. If you haven't already, stop reading this and go. Go! Don't just disappear for days, weeks, months, without a trace. Tell them that you get migraines, and that when you get migraines you cannot work. If they don't understand, get a new advisor immediatly. If you can't get a new advisor, make sure that someone official and important in your department is aware of the situation. I was very fortunate. Both of my advisors were understanding. Every time I had a migraine (especially the ones that lasted for more than one day) they wished me well and that was that. 

Advice #2: Get Meds

Go to a doctor, stupid. Get medicated. I have two prescriptions. One for Rizatriptan (Maxalt) and the other for Sumatriptan (Imitrex). If you get Maxalt, beware that the five milligram pill might not do anything. Ten milligrams do the trick for me. Both drugs make me loopy and lower my IQ by 50 points, but it's well worth the price. 

There are also over the counter drugs. Excedrin in particular works well, but at the cost of your entire stomach lining. I'll spare you the details. Once in a while is fine; too often is very bad. Like, ulcer bad. If you get strings of migraines and need to take something daily, I hihgly recomend the prescription drugs, which are much gentler on the stomach. 

I find that just *having* the medications nearby will slow my heartrate when the migraine (and the inevitable panic that follows pain's promise) starts to creep in. 

Advice #3: Water, Aerobics

Drink a lot of water. Drink more water in one sitting than you want to, and then fill the cup again and drink that as well. And do that several times throughout the day. 